[Pitch] Clock, Instant, Date, and Duration (#1452)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-clock-instant-date-duration.md

  
  var now: Instant { get }
  
  func sleep(until deadline: Instant) async throws
}
```

This means that given an instant it is intrinsically linked to the clock; e.g. a monotonic instant is not meaningfully comparable to a wall clock instant. However as an ease of use concession the durations between two instants can be compared, however doing this across clocks is considered a programmer error unless handled very carefully. By making the protocol hierarchy just clocks and instants it means that we can easily express a compact form of a duration that is usable in all cases; particularly for APIs that might adopt Duration as a replacement to an existing type. 

Clocks can then be used to measure a given amount of work. This means that clock should have the extensions to allow for the affordance of measuring workloads for metrics but also measure them for performance benchmarks. 

```swift
// measure with any clock
public func measure<Clock: ClockProtocol>(clock: Clock, _ work: () async throws -> Void) reasync rethrows -> Duration

// measure with a monotonic clock
public func measure(_ work: () async throws -> Void) reasync rethrows -> Duration

> ```

Reviewer: Are they examples for how you can use `Clocks` to measure work, or are you proposing them as free-flow functions, not scoped anywhere? 

Also
> clock should have the extensions to allow for the affordance of measuring

If we think that clock should have these extensions, would it make sense to make them a requirement for `ClockProtocol`?

##### Instant

As previously stated, instants need to be compared, and might be stored as a key but only need to define a concept of now and a way to advance them given a duration. By utilizing a protocol to define an instant it provides a mechanism in which to use the right storage for the type but also be type safe with regards to the clock they are intended for. The primary reasoning that instants are useful is that they can be composed.

Given a function with a deadline as an instant, if it calls another function that takes a deadline as an instant, the original can just be passed without mutation to the next function. That means that the instant in which that deadline elapses does not have interference with the pre-existing calls or execution time in-between functions. One common example of this is the timeout associated with url requests; a timeout does not fully encapsulate how the execution deadline occurs; there is a deadline to meet for the connection to be established, data to be sent, and a response to be received; a timeout spanning all of those must then have measurement to account for each step, whereas a deadline is static throughout.

```swift

> public protocol InstantProtocol: Comparable, Hashable, Sendable{

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public protocol InstantProtocol: Comparable, Hashable, Sendable {
```

```swift
public struct Duration: Sendable {
  public var nanoseconds: Int64
  
  public init<T: BinaryInteger>(nanoseconds: T)
}

extension Duration {
  public static func seconds<T: BinaryInteger>(_ seconds: T) -> Duration
  public static func seconds(_ seconds: Double) -> Duration
  public static func milliseconds<T: BinaryInteger>(_ milliseconds: T) -> Duration
  public static func milliseconds(_ milliseconds: Double) -> Duration
  public static func microseconds<T: BinaryInteger>(_ microseconds: T) -> Duration
  public static func microseconds(_ microseconds: Double) -> Duration
  public static func nanoseconds<T: BinaryInteger>(_ value: T) -> Duration 
}

extension Duration: Codable { }
extension Duration: Hashable { }
extension Duration: Equatable { }
extension Duration: Comparable { }
extension Duration: AdditiveArithmetic { }

extension Duration {
  public static func / (_ lhs: Duration, _ rhs: Double) -> Duration
  public static func /= (_ lhs: inout Duration, _ rhs: Double)
  public static func / <T: BinaryInteger>(_ lhs: Duration, _ rhs: T) -> Duration

>   public static func /= <T: BinaryInteger>(_ lhs: inout Duration, _ rhs: T)

Reviewer: Curious: why do we have a generic one for BinaryInteger but not a one for BinaryFloatingPoint, aka

`public static func / <T: BinaryFloatingPoint>(_ lhs: Duration, _ rhs: T) -> Duration`

Author: I considered that, but the folks from the numerics team reminded me that the only used time type is Double (and conversions if needed to that are pretty simple)

```swift
@available(macOS 10.9, iOS 7.0, tvOS 9.0, watchOS 2.0, macCatalyst 13.0, *)
@_originallyDefinedIn(module: "Foundation", macOS /*TBD*/, iOS /*TBD*/, tvOS /*TBD*/, watchOS /*TBD*/, macCatalyst /*TBD*/)
public struct Date {
  public init(converting monotonicInstant: MonotonicClock.Instant)
  public init(converting uptimeInstant: UptimeClock.Instant)
  
  @available(macOS 12, iOS 15, tvOS 15, watchOS 8, *)
  public static var now : Date { get }
}

extension Date: InstantProtocol {
  public func advanced(by duration: Duration) -> Date
  public func duration(to other: Date) -> Duration
}

extension Date: Codable { }
extension Date: Hashable { }
extension Date: Equatable { }
```

> As a _potential_ implementation detail; `Date` currently stores its value as a `Double` of seconds from Jan 1 2001 UTC. This causes floating point drift when the value is further out from that point in time, since we are taking the leap to move `Date` down the stack from Foundation to the standard library this seems like perfect opportunity to address this issue with a more robust storage solution. Instead of storing as a 64 bit `Double` value, it will now be stored as a `Int64` for seconds, and a `UInt32` for nanoseconds normalized where the nanoseconds storage will be no more than 1,000,000,000 nanoseconds (which is 29 bits) and a full range of seconds. This means that the storage size of `Date` will increase from 64 bits to 96 bits, with the benefit that the range of expressible dates will be +/-9,223,372,036,854,775,807.999999999 seconds around Jan 1 1970; which is full nanosecond resolution of a range of 585 billion years +/- a few months worth of leap year days and such - we feel that this range is suitable for any software and can be revisited in a few hundred billion years when it becomes an issue.

Reviewer 3: * `UInt32(999_999_999).leadingZeroBitCount` is two, so I think 30 bits are used.
* For less than one billion nanoseconds _before_ 1970, how will negative zero be represented?

```diff
- 1,000,000,000 nanoseconds (which is 29 bits)
+   999,999,999 nanoseconds (which is 30 bits)
```

```suggestion
As a _potential_ implementation detail; `Date` currently stores its value as a `Double` of seconds from Jan 1 2001 UTC. This causes floating point drift when the value is further out from that point in time, since we are taking the leap to move `Date` down the stack from Foundation to the standard library this seems like perfect opportunity to address this issue with a more robust storage solution. Instead of storing as a 64 bit `Double` value, it will now be stored as a `Int64` for seconds, and a `UInt32` for nanoseconds normalized where the nanoseconds storage will be no more than 999,999,999 nanoseconds (which is 30 bits) and a full range of seconds. This means that the storage size of `Date` will increase from 64 bits to 96 bits, with the benefit that the range of expressible dates will be +/-9,223,372,036,854,775,807.999999999 seconds around Jan 1 1970; which is full nanosecond resolution of a range of 585 billion years +/- a few months worth of leap year days and such - we feel that this range is suitable for any software and can be revisited in a few hundred billion years when it becomes an issue.
```

Author: Good catch, yay for off by one errors...

  public var now: Date { get }
  public func sleep(until deadline: Date) async throws
}

extension ClockProtocol where Self == WallClock {
  public static var wall: WallClock { get }
}
```

##### MonotonicClock

When instants are for local processing only and need to be high resolution without the encumbrance of suspension while the machine is asleep `MonotonicClock` is the tool for the job. The `MonotonicClock.Instant` type can be initialized with a wall clock instant if that value can be expressed in terms of a relative point to now; knowing the delta between the current time and the specified wall clock instant a conversion to the current monotonic reference point can be made such that conversion (if possible) represents what the value would be in terms of the monotonic clock. Much like the wall clock version the monotonic clock also offers an extension to access the clock instance as the inferred base type property.

```swift
public struct MonotonicClock {
  public init()
  
  public static var now: Instant { get }
}

extension MonotonicClock: ClockProtocol {
  public struct Instant { 
    public init?(converting wallclockInstant: WallClock.Instant)
    

>     public static var now: MonotonicClock.Instant { get }

Reviewer 2: `InstantProtocol` doesn't have a `now` requirement; is this intentionally public?

Author: Yep, it is so you can use the .now shorthand for the common clock instant types

  }

  public var now: Instant { get }
  public func sleep(until deadline: Instant) async throws
}

extension MonotonicClock.Instant: InstantProtocol { 
  func advanced(by duration: Duration) -> MonotonicClock.Instant
  func duration(to other: MonotonicClock.Instant) -> Duration
}

extension ClockProtocol where Self == MonotonicClock {
  public static var monotonic: MonotonicClock { get }
}
```

##### UptimeClock

Where local process scoped or cross machine scoped instants are not suitable uptime serves the purpose of a clock that does not increment while the machine is asleep but is a time that is referenced to the boot time of the machine, this allows for the affordance of cross process communication in the scope of that machine. Similar to the other clocks there is an extension to access the clock instance as the inferred base type property.

```swift
public struct UptimeClock: ClockProtocol {
  public init()
  
  public static var now: Instant { get }
}

extension UptimeClock: ClockProtocol {
  public struct Instant { 
    public init?(converting wallclockInstant: WallClock.Instant)

>     public static var now: UptimeClock.Instant { get }

Reviewer 2: Same comment here.

Author: Same answer (Technically Date has that too and has super handy for folks)

Reviewer 2: Right. I guess I was accustomed to `Date.now` from the latest Foundation version.
